<!-- START: this line starts content from: inc/rules.closed.hdr -->

# The IOCCC is closed

The IOCCC is **NOT** accepting new submissions at this time.  See the
[IOCCC winning entries page](../years.html) for the entries that have won the
IOCCC in the past.

These rules are a **TENTATIVE proposal** for the next IOCCC
and are **likely be to be updated** before the next IOCCC.

See our
FAQ on "[rules, guidelines, tools feedback](../faq.html#feedback)"
as well as our
FAQ on "[about asking questions](../faq.html#question)"
about these rules. You might also find the FAQ in general useful, especially the
FAQ on "[how to enter the IOCCC](../quick-start.html#enter)".

Watch both [the IOCCC status page](../status.html) and the
[@IOCCC mastodon feed](https://fosstodon.org/@ioccc) for information about
future IOCCC openings.

**HINT to mastodon users**: You may wish to refresh the [@IOCCC
mastodon feed](https://fosstodon.org/@ioccc) page and/or mastodon
app from time to time to view IOCCC mastodon updates.

<!-- END: the next line ends content from: inc/rules.closed.hdr -->
<!-- This is the last line modified by the tool: bin/gen-status.sh -->

29th International Obfuscated C Code Contest Official Rules
------------------------------------------------------------

Copyright © 2024-2025 Leonid A. Broukhis and Landon Curt Noll.

All Rights Reserved.  Permission for personal, education or non-profit use is
granted provided this this copyright and notice are included in its entirety
and remains unaltered.  All other uses **MUST** receive prior permission in
writing by [contacting the judges](../contact.html).


Rules version
-------------

These IOCCC Rules are version **29.02 2025-11-19**.

Be sure to read the [IOCCC guidelines](guidelines.html).


Rule 0 Dates
------------

This IOCCC runs from ${START_DATE_TIME} UTC to ${CLOSE_DATE_TIME} UTC.

This contest will enter the open state on ${OPEN_DATE_TIME} UTC.

This contest will enter the judging state on ${JUDGMENT_DATE_TIME} UTC.

The above dates are subject to change until the contest is officially open.

**NOTE**: As of this draft, the above dates are TBD (to be determined).


Rule 1 Program
---------------

Your submission **MUST** be a C program.


Rule 2 Size
-----------

`Rule 2` requires that your submission satisfy **BOTH**
[Rule 2a Gross Size](rules.html#rule-2a-gross-size)
and
[Rule 2b Next Size](rules.html#rule-2b-net-size).
During development this can be checked using `iocccsize(1)`:

    iocccsize prog.c

### Rule 2a Gross Size

The overall maximum size of your `prog.c` program source **MUST NOT**
exceed **4993** bytes.


### Rule 2b Net Size

When the filename of your program source (i.e., `prog.c`) is given as a
command line argument to the latest version of the official IOCCC size
tool (hereby referred to as `iocccsize(1)`), the value printed **MUST
NOT** exceed **2503**.


Rule 3 Register
---------------

You **MUST** register, using a valid email address, in order to submit
entries to the IOCCC. You may register while the contest is **pending** or **open**.

A few days after registering, you'll receive your UUID username and
temporary password, which you **MUST** change within 14 days. If you
fail to change it in a timely manner, you'll need to
[contact the Judges](../contact.html) by email to request a reset.

It can take a few days to process your registration and for the server to
email your details, therefore make sure to allow yourself ample time to
register and submit your entries; **DO NOT WAIT UNTIL THE FINAL DAYS**
to register! The judges are **NOT** responsible for delayed or lost
email or for those who wait until the last minute to try to register!

See [Entering the IOCCC: the bare minimum you need to know](../quick-start.html#enter).

See [Rule 8 Submission](rules.html#rule-8-submission).


Rule 4 Files
------------

The submission **MUST** include at least these files: `Makefile`, `prog.c`,
`remarks.md`,`.info.json`, and `.auth.json`.  The last two **MUST** be
generated by `mkiocccenty(1)` when packing a submission, and **MUST**
pass the `chksubmit(1)` tests.

The `Makefile`, `remarks.md`,`.info.json`, and `.auth.json` **MUST**
have a file size **greater than 0**.

Your submitted source code **MUST** be called `prog.c`.  When the `Makefile`
compiles your code, the executable (if applicable) **MUST** be called `prog`.
The `Makefile` may compile your source code into other filenames as well.

As `prog`, `prog.alt`, `prog.alt.o`, `prog.o` may be created by your
`Makefile`, your submission **MUST NOT** include those files in
your top directory, as original content.

Your submission may **NOT** have any file that starts with `COPYING`,
`COPYRIGHT`, or `LICENSE` as those files are reserved by IOCCC.

Your submission may **NOT** have in the top directory, `prog.orig.c`,
`README.md`, nor `index.html` as those files reserved by IOCCC.

Your submission may **NOT** have in the top directory, any file
that matches a file glob pattern form `[0-9][0-9][0-9][0-9]_*.tar.bz2`
as those files are reserved by IOCCC.

Your submission may **ONLY** contain files and directories.  Other file
types such as symlinks, sockets, etc are **NOT** allowed.

All directories **MUST** have a file mode of **0755**.  All files
**MUST** have the file mode of **0444**, except for files that
end in `.sh` which must have a mode of **0555**.

All files that end in `.md` **MUST** be in markdown format.
We recommend that markdown files observe our
[IOCCC markdown guidelines](../markdown.html).

All filenames are treated as case insensitive.  For example, `REMARKS.MD`,
and `Remarks.md`, and `remarks.md` are considered by `mkiocccenty(1)`
to be the **SAME** file.  If you are preparing your submission on a case
sensitive filesystem, ensure that your submission will work on
a case insensitive filesystem.

The `remarks.md` and `Makefile` are explained in more detail in the Guidelines.

See [IOCCC markdown guidelines](../markdown.html).

See [Rule 17 Packaging](rules.html#rule-17-packaging).


Rule 5 Purity
-------------

Your submission **MUST NOT** modify the filenames or content of any of
your original submission, such as `prog.c`, `Makefile`, or any supplied
data files.  To modify files, your program can make a copy or you can
use the `Makefile` to setup working copies.  Any working copies **MUST** be
cleaned up by the `Makefile` `clobber` target, so as to restore the
directory to its original state.

Your submission **MUST NOT** create or modify directories and files
ABOVE the current directory with the exception of the `/tmp` and the
`/var/tmp` directories as long as the directory name or filename does
**NOT** start with "." (dot).

The `Makefile` `clobber` target **MUST** be restore your submission into
original form, including the removal of any created files and directories.

Your code should be able to run under a
[SUS environment](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/).


Rule 6 Free
-----------

I am **NOT** a Rule, I am a `free(void *human);` ‼️

```c
    while (!(ioccc(rule(you(are(number(6)))))) {
        ha(); ha(); ha();
    }
```

See [Rule 19 Prime](rules.html#rule-19-prime).


Rule 7 Original Work
--------------------

In short: You wrote it, you own it, and its an original work.

You, the author(s), **MUST** own the contents of your submission, or you **MUST**
have permission from the original owner(s) to its use.  If you submit
any content that is owned by others, you **MUST** detail that ownership,
i.e., who owns what, and document the permission you obtained from them
in your `remarks.md` file.

The IOCCC has a rich history of remarkable winning entries created by
authors who skilfully employed various techniques to develop their code.
While it isn't required, you are allowed to use tools to develop and
test your submission.  These tools may include, but aren't limited to
code generators, code analysis tools, static code analysis tools, runtime
analysis tools, machine learning tools, natural language models, code
copilot tools, so-called AI services, large language models (LLMs), etc.
If you do make use of such tools or services, then we encourage you to
describe what tools and how you used those tools, in your `remarks.md` file.

See [Rule 16 Anonymous](rules.html#rule-16-anonymous).


Rule 8 Submission
-----------------

The Submit Server will only accept submissions from those who have
registered and only while the contest is open.

The Submit Server places a total submission size limit of **3999971** bytes.

Each account has ten (**10.000**) submission slots (**0..9)**.  Each submission
slot should be annotated by the server as to whether its was received,
processed, malformed, etc.  Please take note of any errors, rectify,
and resubmit.  In order to avoid potential packaging errors, it is **highly
recommended** to use `mkiocccentry(1)`.

See
[Rule 3 Register](rules.html#rule-3-register),
[Rule 15 Building](rules.html#rule-15-building),
and
[Rule 17 Packaging](rules.html#rule-17-packaging).


Rule 9 No hands
----------------

Entries requiring human interaction to be initially compiled are **NOT**
permitted. However, see the guidelines.  Each entry **MUST** automated the
its build process using `bash`, `gmake`, `gcc`, `clang`, under a
[SUS environment](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/).

Note references to `gmake` can be any GNU Make compatible tool.

See [Rule 15 Building](rules.html#rule-15-building).


Rule 10 Privileges
------------------

Programs that require special privileges (setuid(2), setgid(2),
super-user, special owner, special group, etc.) are **HIGHLY DISCOURAGED**.
We do **NOT** guarantee these functions will behave as you expect on our
test platforms.  If your program needs special permissions you **MUST**
document this fact and explain why it is needed in your submission’s
`remarks.md` file.

Furthermore, if you need a supplementary program that you include to
have these permissions, you will also have to explain this, because these
bits are **NOT** allowed in submissions and those bits will **NOT** be copied by
`mkiocccentry(1)`.

See [Rule 4 Files](rules.html#rule-4-files),
and
[Rule 5 Purity](rules.html#rule-5-purity).


Rule 11 Abuse
-------------

Legal abuse of the rules is somewhat encouraged, but comes with risks.
A submission that, in the opinion of the Judges, violates the rules **WILL
BE DISQUALIFIED**.  Submissions that plan to abuse the rules **MUST** justify
why their rule abuse is legal (or interesting) in the `remarks.md` file.

Submission packaging abuse will **NOT** be tolerated and for this reason
its recommended to use `mkiocccentry(1)`.  During development you can
check your `prog.c` size limits using `iocccsize(1)`, e.g., `iocccsize -v1 prog.c`.
Overriding problems detected by any of the IOCCC tools
risks that the submission will be rejected.

If you do submit a rule abusing or violating submission, then consider
also submitting an alternate version in a different submission server
slot that does **NOT** violate the rules in case your rule abuse excuse
is rejected.

**IMPORTANT**: If you do submit such an alternate non-rule abusing
version, please indicate that in your `remarks.md` file of your non-rule
abusing version so that the Judges don't think you uploaded a duplicate
into a wrong slot by mistake.


Rule 12 UTF-8
-------------

Use of UTF-8 is supported by `C89` standard and its updates and so too by the IOCCC.


Rule 13 Newlines
----------------
Any C source that fails to compile because lines contain carriage-returns
(CTRL+M, `\r`) in particular as part of DOS/Windows style newlines might
be rejected.  Please do **NOT** put trailing CTRL+M in `prog.c`, `Makefile`,
or `remarks.md` files, but instead end lines with Unix newline (line-feed,
CTRL+J, `\n`).

You are permitted, in order to try and squeeze your `prog.c` under a
[Rule 2a Gross Size](rules.html#rule-2a-gross-size) and/or
[Rule 2b Next Size](rules.html#rule-2b-net-size)
limits, to **NOT** end source with a newline.  If you
need to do this, please document that in your `remarks.md` file and if
your compiler complains about this, document this too and update your
`Makefile` to account for this.


Rule 14 Resubmit
----------------

Submissions that are substantially similar to previous winning IOCCC
entries are discouraged.

You are allowed to resubmit to a later contest, a submission that didn't
win the IOCCC.  If you do so, then you would be well advised to try and
enhance and improve your submission.  If you do resubmit something that
didn't previously win, then you are encouraged to mention this in your
`remarks.md` file as this sometimes helps.


Rule 15 Building
----------------

The `Makefile` **MUST** adhere to GNU Make file syntax.  Its recommended
that you copy and rename the `Makefile.example` as a template.  The primary
target of the `Makefile` **MUST** be `prog` and the source file is `prog.c`.
The C compiler and preprocessor **MUST** be invoked using `${CC}` and `${CPP}`
macros respectively.

The `clobber` target should clean and restore the submission directory
tree to its original state, such as removing temporary files or any
modified data files.  Don't assume that `git` tool chain is installed,
i.e., do **NOT** expect `git clean -f` to work.

The `Makefile` **MUST** use a syntax that is compatible with
`bash(1)` and GNU `make(1)`.  You are encouraged to use `SHELL=
bash` in your `Makefile`; please add a space between the `=` and
the value such as:

    SHELL= bash

Assume that commands commonly found in [Single UNIX
Specification](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_UNIX_Specification)
environments and systems are available in the search
`$PATH`.  Avoid command options that aren't part of
[SUS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_UNIX_Specification), such as
GNU long name options `--example` or extensions like `grep -P`.

Do **NOT** assume that `.` (current directory) is in the `$PATH` environment variable.

See [Rule 4 Files](rules.html#rule-4-files).


Rule 16 Anonymous
-----------------

Your source code, data files, remarks, and program output **MUST NOT**
identify the author(s) of your code (unless you are **Peter Honeyman**
or pretending to be **Peter Honeyman**).  In order to be impartial the
[Judges](https://www.ioccc.org/judges.html) do **NOT** know who is submitting
entries to the IOCCC until final selection is made.  Even if you are
a past winner, you **MUST NOT** reveal your identity deliberately or by
accident anywhere in your submission.  ***Failure to comply may result
in the submission being disqualified.***


Rule 17 Packaging
-----------------

The files, directories, and paths **MUST** conform to the limits imposed by
`mkiocccentry(1)`, including but **NOT** limited, to their names, count, path
length, directory tree depth, and permissions.

The submission tree may have at most **13** directories and maximum
directory depths of **4**.  The maximum number of files, excluding
`prog.c`, `remarks.md`, `Makefile`, `prog.alt.c`, `try.sh`, `try.alt.sh`,
`.info.json` and `.auth.json` is **31**.  And the maximum file-path
component is **38** and maximum path length is **60**.

The submission **MUST** be a `.txz` compressed tarball as constructed by
`mkiocccentry(1)`, which **MUST** be within **[1..3999971]** bytes in size.
The sum of all file lengths, after unpacking from the tarball, **MUST** be
less than `27651*1024` bytes.

The tarball file **MUST** pass all `txzchk(1)` checks and the tarball
filename **MUST** pass all `fnamchk(1)` checks.  You may **NOT** submit a tarball
created by the `-d` or `-s` seed options of `mkiocccentry(1)`.

The unpacked submission directory **MUST** pass the checks performed by the
current version of `chksubmit(1)`.

The `prog.c` file **MUST** pass the [Rule 2 Size](rules.html#rule-2-size)
size checks performed by `iocccsize(1)`.  The `Makefile` and `remarks.md` files cannot
be empty nor blank.  The `.auth.json` and `.info.json` files **MUST** be compatible with what
`mkiocccentry(1)` generates.

Submissions that package using older versions of the mkiocccentry
toolkit to are **HIGHLY LIKELY** to be **REJECTED**!  Be sure
that you are using the latest tools from the
[mkiocccentry toolkit](https://github.com/ioccc-src/mkiocccentry)
GitHub repo.

In summary: it is best to use `mkioccentry(1)` to package your submission,
rather than roll-it-by-hand.

See [Rule 4 Files](rules.html#rule-4-files).


Rule 18 License
---------------

The entirety of your submission **MUST** be submitted under the following license:

[CC BY-SA 4.0 DEED Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)

See [Rule 7 Original Work](rules.html#rule-7-original-work).


Rule 19 Prime
-------------

This 19th rule, while prime, is reserved for future abuse 😁.
Additional rules, both humorous and otherwise, may be added
below this rule in future contests.

See [Rule 6 Free](rules.html#rule-6-free).


Further Reading
---------------

Please read the [Guidelines](guidelines.html) next for further
commentary on The Rules.

See also the [FAQ](../faq.html).

Consider joining our Discord
server for discussions about The Rules, questions for the Judges, and
`C` in general.


Leonid A. Broukhis  
chongo (Landon Curt Noll) /\\cc/\\
